We're in a dire state. You can explain
how awful things are and say we'll do
our best, but you have to have a degree
of charisma to do it. And one thing our
present prime minister does not have is
[music] charisma.
>> David Dimbleby, who anchored 10 general
elections on the feebral state of UK
politics.
>> We've had 70 out of 403 Labour MPs
calling on the PM to go.
>> Would you say to the Labour Party, don't
change your prime minister?
>> No, I'd say change him. I think you've
got a dad there. I mean a nice man and
no doubt very intelligent man but seen
public with somebody who decides
something and then once he gets a bit of
opposition [music] turns back from
Bloomberg weekend. This is the Michelle
Hussein show. [music]
As we go into this episode, I want to
say that if you're from the UK, David
Dimbley is not going to need much
introduction. You're likely to know him
or at least to recognize him. He was for
decades the face of election programs on
the BBC. The person who announced which
party had won. The person who said in
the middle of the night in June 2016,
nearly 10 years ago now, that the UK had
voted to leave the European Union. He's
seen prime ministers from Thatcher to
Blair and many more since come into
power and leave it. which is why I
thought of him in relation to the unrest
right now in the governing Labor Party.
The fact that Kier Stalmer, who won a
landslide election victory less than two
years ago, could be unseated by one of
his own. I wanted essentially David
Dimbleby to put all of that in a wider
context to analyze what's happening in
the UK to look at its leaders Starmer
for sure but also Andy Burnham his most
likely potential challenger and Nigel
Farage of Reform UK who you might have
seen on this very show because David
Dimby was also the face of royal
coverage on the BBC. We talked to about
the king and about Prince William. And
as ever, there's a written version of
this on bloomberg.com/michell.
And this time, my notes include the
royal finances and history going right
back to the 1300s.
>> Thank you for tempting me in. You only
got me here by grotesque flattery.
>> I like to think of it as persuasion.
You're someone who's observed.
>> Are you beginning now?
>> I am. We're already recording.
>> How long we going to talk for? I think
we'll talk for 40 minutes.
>> Yes. Okay.
>> It'll go by quickly. I promise.
>> That's what they say.
>> That's just flattery to you. [laughter]
>> You might even enjoy it, you know.
>> No.
>> Let's We'll revisit that question at the
end.
So with the level of instability that
the UK is seeing at the moment, this
prospect that we might have a seventh
prime minister in a decade, as an
observer of the political landscape for
so many years, I just want to know what
you make of that and why you think it's
happening.
>> Well, the churn in prime ministers has
really been Tory, hasn't it? Cameron,
May, Johnson, Truss, for God's sake. Um,
and then soon I could barely had a
chance and then there was a general
election. So it's the Tories who've been
the doing the churning, not Labor, but I
do remember there was a famous thing
Harold Wilson always said which was the
way to lead the Labour Party when
they're in government is to keep driving
so hard that everybody's clinging on for
dear life not to fall off the Labor
wagon. The moment you sort of show any
signs of deferring things, changing your
mind, then everybody starts fighting for
their idea of what the Labour Party
should be. So you need a prime minister
who can drive it and that's the key
thing. And then that brings back
confidence to the Labor Party or fear
that they'll be kicked out if they're
not in accord with it. But the fact that
it is happening now to a UK prime
minister being questioned and more than
questioned from within his own party,
doesn't that show that there is
something wider a foot than these two
dominant parties? That there's something
about our political firmament or the
appetite of our public that seems to
engender this. Well, there's certainly
um an electoral system and I don't want
to go into constitutional things that
absolutely doesn't reflect opinion in
the country and so a lot of people feel
that they vote in a general election and
it doesn't get represented. I mean if
you look at the last general election
reform got I think more votes than the
Liberal Democrats. They got a tiny
number of seats. Um the proportions
people get is doesn't reflect the
balance of opinion. So if you go into
the voting booth and you vote and
millions of people vote and then you
don't get any seats in the House of
Commons
um you feel unrepresented and I think
that does cause huge frustration. I mean
it's crazy to argue for a change in our
constitution. I don't think that's going
to happen. It's a long process but it
it's I mean our constitution is very
suited to um aristocratic government in
the 18th and 19th centuries and they
don't conceive of having the public I
mean the public having views I mean
people below a certain freehold value of
house having views no it wasn't
contrived for that it was simply for a
simple virtually a dichotomy and even
then during the 18th and 19th centuries
we churned prime ministers so there's
Nothing much new in the churning that
went on with Liz Truss. I mean, she was
obviously a disastrous choice and and it
didn't work out. But it's I think much
more important is that how do you get
and this is where reform comes in and I
suspect some of the vote for the Greens
come in. If people don't feel that they
are getting represented, if you have a a
a swave of people voting reform who got
more votes for instance in the last
general election than the Liberal
Democrats but only got four seats to the
Liberal Democrats, 40 or 50, whatever it
was, then people, you know, facing
issues about their income going down and
the NHS not serving them well and
everything feel but I I voted and
nothing actually happens. And if you
take I mean you have to be careful with
voting but you have to take sort of
accumulation of individual votes. I mean
the syphologists always [snorts] treat
it as a great sway of opinion but if you
go into the minds of just a single voter
in Makerfield for instance where there's
going to be this bi-election
>> the one that may bring the likely next
prime minister to parliament
>> though reform won 50% of the vote there
in the local elections in that area. So,
nobody knows quite what will happen.
But, I mean, if you took that and just
examined what individual voters thought
um and then ask them whether they felt
they were represented, that's why
they're voting for reform because they
don't feel what is that word heard. They
don't feel heard.
>> But we're off track on on the churning
of prime ministers because I think
that's much more to do with warfare
within political parties.
>> Yes. I remember the time and I'm sure
you you remember as well where you know
in the British political establishment
well wide more widely in the public
you'd look at the many prime minister
somewhere like Italy and you'd feel
quite superior about it that that was
not the kind of thing that happened in
the UK. Do you think that we are heading
for a multi-party system that will mean
the only way to govern will be to be in
coalitions and that will
>> that will need a different mindset
>> certainly on the present form of reform.
I mean if the local election results
were at a general election and of
[clears throat] course this you know
there are all sorts of caveats you have
to put in about well would they have
been exactly the same if it had been
reform wouldn't have a working majority
in the house of commons so of course
there would have to be yes and I mean
it's easy
you know I mean it's easy to mock
countries like Italy where it was all
chaotic now seems to be rather stable I
mean these things come and go we were
the sick man of Europe. Remember way
back? I mean, in my lifetime, not in
yours. We were a sick man of Europe
because because we our growth was low.
We had winter of discontent. We had
strikes everywhere. The country ground
to a halt. We had a three-day week. I
mean, we've been through before, you
know, and we're going through it again
now.
>> So, is your
I'm not saying I'm an optimist. I'm not
saying I'm optimistic. I
>> I'm wondering if you're saying should
one be steady at the moment, Ben. And
would you say to the Labour Party, don't
change your prime minister?
>> No, absolutely not. I'd say change him.
I think you've got a dud there. I mean,
a nice man and um no doubt very
intelligent man, but a man so
overcautious and so seen publicly, I
don't know what he is privately, but
seen publicly as somebody who decides
something and then once he gets a bit of
opposition turns back. Unlike Thatcho,
unlike Blair, who are kind of bold
statement politicians in times of
crisis, you need that. At the moment,
the Labour Party is in complete disarray
about what it really wants.
>> So, if it is Andy Burnham who comes to
parliament and then is in a position to
challenge the prime minister, do you
think he would be different in substance
or is it the case that he'd be a better
communicator? And that is crucial in our
age.
>> Um, I think he'd be a far better
communicator. I don't know what his
views are. I mean, I've had him on
programs often and have never quite been
able to work out what he stands for to
tell the truth. I think it comes and
goes a bit. I mean, you know, we've now
got this thing that [sighs] uh he wants
to go back into the EU. Oh. Oh, no. I
don't actually. No, not No, I don't want
to go back into the EU. No, that's way
Well, obviously has to say that cuz if
he goes I mean, he's not going to win
not going to win the Labor Party over.
He's not going to win the country over
if he says it's time to go back into the
EU. Even
>> he's probably not going to win election
in that particular area.
>> Yeah, that area. I mean, which was a
reform area. So, how would he be
different? I think he has on his side
the kind of political patterner of
energy, youth, enthusiasm and the
so-called success of Manchester which is
compared to the UK as a whole tiny
microcosm but nevertheless generally
seen to be successful that they brought
in they got industry to come to
Manchester Manchester was revived under
Bernham's merry um and we keeping on
being told he was very good with the
buses So, you know, those are sound
small things, but they they they show a
kind of willingness to change. So, I I
don't I mean, who knows?
>> Andy Bernham's people have told
Bloomberg that he would not change the
current fiscal rules, which essentially
limit borrowing, which leads to the
question of how differently he may or
may not govern. Would he be a better
communicator, but a prime minister with
a similar policy agenda? Which leads me
to wonder, is there something more
fundamental to do with the country
underway? And you've seen, you know,
different governments over a long period
of time in that are we as a country in
favor of we want good public services,
but we don't really want to pay the
levels of taxation that make them
possible.
>> Well, we're pretty well taxed, aren't
we? We're fairly highly taxed. We're up
with the European averages. I think
we're in a position of stagnation on
government borrowing, on taxation,
and on GDP growth. I mean, there's been
since Brexit, what is it? Fall on
prospective growth of 8%. So, people are
genuinely feeling hardressed, hard done
by. They're not able to take their
holidays. They've they money doesn't go
around as well as it did. And that's a
that's really oppressive because it's a
trap because the theory of successful
social democracy is amelioration all the
time. That's the point of it. A society
goes richer because of the energy,
inventiveness, enthusiasm
and commitment that it has to its own
prosperity. So it produces better
educated people. It produces um more
intelligent solutions to problems. And
we we've had the of course the problem
of going from a heavily industrialized
society to a service industry society
which is difficult. But this position of
falling back. So you get these terrible
stories of uh you know young people
unemployed in perpetuity and then coming
forward with supposed mental health
problems and then being put on drugs and
all that. We're in a dire state. I'm not
pretending we're not in a dire state.
which I think we are in that sense
>> economically or socially I think you
mean
>> economically as well
>> and what is the impact of that on the
social fabric
>> I don't know they don't riot well they
do riot actually as we saw this week I
mean the uh the the two massive
demonstrations in London which
mercifully didn't end up in a thousand
deaths I think people who vote reform I
don't know quite what they're after but
it's certainly I think probably above
all greater prosperity that's I mean
that's the one thing people go for. It
may get disguised as controlling
immigration,
you know, it may get disguised as
cutting taxation or something, but it's
actually GDP growth so that people feel
each generation feels that they're doing
better and not that they're slipping
back. And that's the that's the key to
good government. And and I I mean, God
knows how at the moment that can be done
because we're, you know, up to our eyes
in we can't get the IMF says we can't go
any further on our debt um on our guilt
yields and all that. We can't change
that. Um you can't effectively reduce
taxation. You can't effectively I don't
know. I don't know what you do.
>> But what I do know you do is you have to
kind of recognize those are the problems
and talk about them.
>> And you need the leaders who are fit for
the moment.
>> Yes. I mean, I maybe I put too much on
leadership, but I do think that
acknowledging,
you know, you can't just be meymouthed
and say things are going to get better
and then actually do nothing very much.
If you want to, you can explain how
awful things are uh and say we'll we'll
do our best, but you you have have to
have a degree of charisma to do it. And
one thing our present prime minister
does not have is charisma. I mean, he
mutters. He mutters.
I mean, look at Trump. Trump's a good
example. Trump Trump traded on exactly
the same disaection in the middle of
America that
has led to the re the rise of reform.
Um, that is to say, lower middle class,
put it that way, and working people who
just feel they're slipping backwards.
And that's why Trump was so
enthusiastically endorsed. That's why he
may be in trouble in the midterms if the
economy doesn't pick up. But that's a
and that's a strong real political
instinct. I mean, people in Wall Street
or the city can sort of sneer at it and
you know those are left behinds, but
it's they're the voters. It's a
democracy and and they're the ones who
have to be constantly nurtured and
looked after if democracies to work, if
to succeed. Are you worried about what
the future holds for the country?
>> Yes. Yes. But I've always been I've
always been worried. I was worried when
we had the three-day week. I was worried
when the offshoot of the Iraq war. I'm
worried about the Iran war. Of course,
I'm worried about the future in that
sense. But if you mean, am I worried
about whether our politics can cope with
the crisis we're in? Uh, yes I am.
because I think in some ways it's
unfitted to cope for the reasons that I
was explaining.
>> What do you think about the prospect of
Nigel Farage being the next prime
minister?
>> I [laughter]
well I don't think [clears throat] Can I
say this? I don't know. I'm not sure
he's temperamentally suited to the job
and I haven't yet seen any signs around
him of people of caliber to act as
chancer,
foreign secretary, home secretary until
we see them and how competent they are.
At the moment, it's a bit of a sort of
mix and match leftovers. It seems to me
I don't yet feel that Farage is
presenting other than himself and some
bold ideas which may or may not be
acceptable or doable. I don't think he's
presenting himself as a as a government
yet, but he's got three years to go.
>> We know that they've got um a big policy
on mass deportations. That's that's what
they have promised if they come to
government. And that does mean that
given they want to abolish the
indefinite leave to remain status where
people can be here without being British
citizens if they've fulfilled the
requirements. I mean the prospect of
policies like like that instinctively
how do you respond to them? What do you
think they would mean for the Britain we
know? I think instinctively that they
would be totally disastrous because I
think that the ramifications would go
well beyond
the few who may be here because they've
cheated about their circumstances or you
know have got indefinitely to remain
improperly but overall
I um I think it would be I think it
would have a terrible effect on
communities that for 20 30 40
have lived side by side. I think it
would be devastating, but I also don't
think it would be doable. ICE in
Britain,
>> I sort of don't think so. I mean, I I
>> Well, I've asked Nigdel Farish this
question because he's been on this
podcast. and and he said we do it in our
way that ICE is not the comparison
because you know ICE are armed and
obviously they exist in the United
States and have done for a long time
before Donald Trump but he was very
clear that he would that a reform
government would do it in their own way.
So
>> and what did he mean by that? I think he
means that they would be that that they
would actually deport people in high
numbers in a way that he would say
previous governments haven't had the to
do.
>> Well, good question. We didn't get that
far.
>> No.
>> Well, they would they would leave
>> I know, but you look at the process for
that. Leave the ACR. They've got to
change the law. They've got to get the
judges out of their hair. Um and then
how many people are they going to
deport? I mean million, half a million,
I don't know what the plan is.
>> But he's made other things happen as
like leaving the EU as you witnessed
over many years when he came on Question
Time,
>> the program that you presented for so
long.
>> Do you think that that exposure on
television helped him become the
national public figure that he now is?
That people knew him because they saw
him on television. They liked the way he
came across. And you know the program
that you fronted was part of giving him
that kind of national status.
>> Mayor Kulpa,
>> not you personally.
>> I tell you what,
>> Donald Trump benefited from being
recognized on TV. Boris Johnson did as
well.
>> It brings us to the whole business of
social media and the way people
communicate nowadays. I'm in two minds
about I mean under BBC rules once he'd
become um a UKIP representative in the
European Parliament he had a right the
party had a right to be I can't remember
how many times two or three times a year
out of 26 programs but then the question
always was well who do we put on and
they were all such dros apart from
Farage he was the only articulate one I
mean we did try one or two others but
they were so boring and so confused And
maybe in the interest of democracy we
should have put them on as boring and
confused. But we wanted a good argument
about what reform was arguing. And so
Farage and that and this is the problem
actually with reform now that he is the
only voice really the reason you were
talking to him. He is the only voice and
and I think that's a a kind of Achilles
heel for him.
>> Yeah. They're definitely they're
definitely now trying to build up
others.
>> Yes. But he's not very good at the
relationships, is he? He falls out with
people quite easily. He's quite he's
quite thin skinned in a funny way. You
know, you need you need if you're going
to lead a new party, you've got to be
quite broad shouldered about who you
bring in. Not not always suspecting. And
>> there's there's definitely a tension
there. He wants others to share the
load, but he is the top of the tree.
>> Yes. Yes.
>> I'm conscious that we're now 10 years on
from the EU referendum and you were the
voice who said that night on the
airwaves were out the people who voted
to leave the EU. But you had also in
anchored the results coverage of the
>> We've left Farage now, have we?
>> We well I mean his big cause was his his
big cause has before this before the
country as a whole was was the EU and
just made me think with this 10 year
anniversary. um you've been a witness to
many big political moments anchoring all
those general elections and the voice of
the referendum in 2016 when the results
came and you played a similar role back
in 1975 when the UK voted to stay in the
European economic community as it was
then. How do you reflect on seeing that
total expanse of time and two different
decisions by the British public? Why did
they vote for and then vote against?
>> Or how did it feel both of those nights
to you having seen that
>> the first one was virtually was a
foregone conclusion really Wilson had
been away and I mean unlike Cameron
[clears throat] who you remember came
back before his referendum which I think
was a actually think was a disastrous
mistake to call it because it became
something quite different. Um but he
came back from Brussels with one or two
minor concessions that he'd been offered
which were no help. But Wilson came back
and Wilson was a wy prime minister and
he came back and said oh we've got this
and we've got that and people just voted
for it because it seemed then to be the
way to go not least cuz the French been
trying to keep us out. So it was to you
know de Gaulle had de Gaulle had vetoed
us going in. So we thought well there
must be something good here because he
doesn't want us in. So let's get in. I
mean that was a much easier course. And
I think what happened in the years since
was that it was an easy target.
Everything could be blamed by
conservatives and by the left of the
Labour Party on being in the EU loss of
control
is particular issues like fisheries and
all that. And so it built up a momentum
and when [clears throat]
in my view very inadvisedly Cameron
decided to call a referendum because he
thought he'd win it and then went to
Europe and got absolutely no change at
all. He was asking he was asking for
trouble and the facts are I mean it may
be okay the people who voted Brexit may
say in 50 years time it'll show it was a
good thing Britain will but we've had 10
years of it now and it has shown us no
advantage at all that I can see it and
hasn't had any effect on immigration
numbers except we no longer have people
from the EU coming easily and students
coming in we have no particular
advantage and 10 years has passed a
decade uh and I'm not surprised urprised
actually that people are very restless.
>> If a future prime minister wants to take
us back into the EU or even the single
market, do you think there should be
another public vote?
>> Absolutely.
>> So that's the only way to undo Brexit to
actually have another public.
>> I think it'd have to be. Yes. Having had
the 5248,
which we now know, incidentally, if
there were a vote would be reversed
pretty well
>> as opinion stands at the moment.
>> Yes. As opinion stands. But that's quite
interesting because there's not been a
case being made for going back in. Just
a lot of regretful noises. But yes, I
think there should certainly be, but it
won't be in my lifetime.
>> I'm conscious as
>> well. I hope I may live long enough to
see. [laughter]
I'd love David to talk a bit about you
as I don't want to be too grand about
this but you have been a witness to
history and that you have seen from the
anchor's chair these moments where
political power shifts or we leave the
EU and I'm of course conscious that that
was part of your father's life too not
just famously being at the liberation of
Bellson but even before that I think
this was just before you were born he
was on the tarmac where Neville
Chamberlain came back from Munich with
the peace in our time
>> piece of paper.
>> Did you ever talk to him about that?
>> No, I don't think so.
>> I'm surprised because you obviously grew
up to be a journalist, too. It's an
incredible moment to have seen. I don't
think most reporters, and you're a
reporter, do talk very much about what
they've done because they're always in
the present and they don't I I didn't
talk to my father about
uh about anything about he didn't like
politics for a start. He wasn't
interested in politics at all.
>> Really?
>> Why wasn't he? He thought it was messy
or dirty.
>> Messy charlatans. Couldn't believe a
word they said. All that kind of thing.
um
>> he'd be perfect for the moment, I think.
>> Yes. But he didn't No, he didn't really
he was he wasn't interested in the
machinations of politics. He did one two
general elections, but he sort of did it
as a observer rather than he wasn't
really interested. But and then his
wartime and this being out in the desert
during the war and then I think the
bravest thing he did when he came back
was to fly with bomber command. He did
25 raids over Germany as an observer
when the attrition rate was well you
were dead after 20 or something and he
did 25 with Guy Gibson.
Never talked about it at all except to
say he was sick once cuz it was bumping
but never. No, I I think
I mean I think it I think it's quite
boring to get isn't it? I mean they tell
stories about this. I've done this and
I've done that and I've done that. I get
that. I didn't think people did.
>> Well, I wondered if it was because
>> he didn't want to center himself that
what was more important was were the
actual events and the observer's
perspective is less important.
>> Yes, absolutely.
>> Which is a good good way to see things
and again is probably something we've
>> been saying any of the things I've been
saying to you this morning. But the
observer's eye is important to to make
sense of what's happening because
>> but he didn't do observational politics.
He did occasional political interviews
and famously I think the when the BBC
Panorama program got huge audiences
which you know was in those days 8 10
million um during the Cuban missile
crisis
he had um a defense expert on and his
last question was well we've had a
question sent in to us from somebody who
says is it safe to go to bed tonight cuz
they thought there might be a nuclear
war overnight and um he asked that
question and the man said yes I think
it's Chalfont it was Lord Chalfont a
little later Lord Chalfun I yes it's
it's safe and that was taken as a kind
of seminal broadcasting moment where
he'd acted to reassure people but it
wasn't his interest in the politics of
it that had led him to it was his
visceral sort of humanity and and and
and just concern for people who were
watching at home you know and so Those
were moments when he did touch politics,
I think. But on the whole, not
>> you've had to find the right words for
the moment in live commentary on royal
occasions. I'm thinking particularly
about the funeral of Diana,
which was, you know, immense shock.
>> And I still remember lines from your
from your commentary then.
>> I don't. [laughter]
>> What do you remember? I remember I
remember the coffin coming out of
Kensington Palace that morning and it
was the first moment that people had
seen a coffin and it was very quiet and
you picked up after everyone watching
had had a chance to absorb just the
pictures
>> and I remember you know learning a huge
amount from from that that when are the
moments where you should not speak
rather than speak it's one of the great
you know But it's interesting cuz the
the BBC in the week after Daniel was
killed in the car crash met every day
and they always angsting about what tone
should we take for this funeral. I said
just just learn your business. You don't
adopt a tone, you reflect a tone.
And so and I remember as that coffin
came down from Kensington Palace the
hearse and turned there was a shout two
women in the crowd at the gate just
shouted God bless you Diana God bless
you and I thought yeah that's exactly
right just leave that happen and then
say as little as possible because it was
perfectly obvious what was happening I
mean the some of the pictures from that
funeral extraordinary and the one the
The only time my voice cracked actually
was um when I saw that on the top of the
hearse in white flowers was just written
mummy. And when I said the word mummy, I
just cracked a bit because I I thought
it was so
simple and moving. But there was an
extraordinary moment when they were
going off after the terrible thing of
the sons having to walk behind the
coffin and all that which was clearly
terrible error. But then the hearse went
off
on its way to where she was to be
buried. And so many flowers were thrown
at this house that the driver had to put
the windscreen wipers on. I'll never
forget that. This extraordinary picture
of carnations and roses and liies and
things just being swept off the car so
he could see where to drive. And again,
you didn't say anything.
You get a closeup of it. The viewer can
see it. It's obvious. You were not happy
about the king going to America for his
recent visit. You thought it was the
wrong political moment to send the king
into when you saw
how the visit actually transpired, the
speeches that the king was able to give
in the presence of President [snorts]
Trump and in Congress. Did you feel
differently?
>> I thought it was handled impeccably
really and I was surprised by that. I
mean, Trump didn't take advantage of it
in the way that I thought he might and
the politics of the Iran war were kept
out of it as far as possible,
but I thought that,
and maybe this was wrong, I thought that
by postponing the visit, we'd put
pressure on Trump, though actually
nobody puts much pressure on Trump. Not
until the midterms that they put
pressure on him. I thought it might just
[clears throat] distance us from it. But
it was curious because the careful
wording of that very good speech that
the king made. I don't know who wrote
that but it was I mean obviously he had
a input but it was a wonderfully crafted
speech.
>> The one in Congress.
>> Yeah. And people said oh amazing 12
standing ovations. Actually you can't
say good morning in Congress if you're a
visitor without getting a standing
ovation. They all getting up at every
turn. But that was a very clever and
subtle speech about the relationship. It
doesn't change the relationship, but it
and I I I don't know what purpose it
actually serves for Britain because I
mean Scotch whiskey got a cut in its
duty.
>> But but the idea that um I there's a
whole story about America and Europe
going on at the moment. In fact, which
I'm doing a podcast on about the
relationship between America from 45 to
now with the rest of the world. And
Trump is obviously an outlier on this.
And a visit by the king is not going to
change policy one way or another.
>> Not change policy, but perhaps there's a
value and a purpose in the fact that he
is uniquely placed and use the
opportunity to talk about the courage of
the people of Ukraine or the importance
of checks and balances
in front of lawmakers and a president,
some of whom don't generally want to
hear any of that and won't hear any of
it said to their face. Well, the mystery
is the mystique of monarchy because if
the French president had gone and said
it or if German president gone and said
it or Maloney or anybody else, nobody
had taken a bit of notice but the
Americans have partly because they many
of them have their histories in in
Britain this huge respect for hereditary
monarchy which is I agree it's a mystery
and it's worth trading on.
>> Are you a monarchist yourself? M
>> I'm a monarchist but I think I'm in
favor of a monarchy that
adapts. Remember that South Africa the
way when apartate collapsed the Africana
prime minister told the Africanas adapt
or die that was their slogan adapt or
die. And I think with our monarchy just
adapting is very important and there's
signs it's actually happening because I
think rather to the discomfort of the
king William has said change is on my
agenda he said it to a Canadian comedian
brilliant line change is on my agenda
and what do we see just yesterday that
he's going to give up 20% of the duche
of Cornwall which is a huge amount of
land over 21 or 27 seven counties of
Britain vast that he's going to give
that land up for development. I mean, I
think he's aware that to keep the
monarchy in line with the country's
feelings and aspirations, you can't go
on with loads of helicopters and planes
and this and that and the other.
>> And the king does need to adapt.
>> And the king himself, the changes he's
made, particularly the way that he took
his brother's title away from him
>> over the Epstein affair.
>> Yes. Yes. That was that was inevitable,
wasn't it?
>> Well, we can say it's inevitable now.
For a long time, it looked like
something impossible to take away a
title that he
>> that is his birthright. How much damage
do you think has been done to the family
and the institution through Andrew? I
think you can say waywood
son, but actually the palace as a whole
failed to do anything to control
his you know when he was I mean this
ridiculous thing of being made a UK
ambassador for trade which is absurd and
everybody knew it was crazy and that he
wasn't actually doing anything for trade
at all but it was sort of connived at.
So there's a the thing I'm against is
the lack of openness in the royal
family. And I think they should have
they should confront the problems they
face. And if it's perfectly obvious that
Prince Andrew as he was is roaring
around the world actually having good
time at the taxpayers's expense. You
shouldn't condone it. You should pull
him in. But his mother, as we know,
indulged him and wouldn't have done
that. I think that parliamentary
scrutiny of the monarchy is very
important. I'm not in any way a
Republican [clears throat]
because I don't think it would work for
the UK.
Try getting a president that would I
mean unlike Ireland where it works
brilliantly.
>> An elected head of state.
>> Yeah. Well, it works there because you
know it's a small much much smaller
country much more cohesive. I mean, it's
accepted, but think of a president that
would work for England, for another
country, Wales, for a third country,
Scotland,
for a fourth Northern Ireland. I mean, I
think it would be incredibly difficult.
and a monarchy that is like the other
European monarchies, not too
pretentious, not too vulgar
in its behavior, not too obviously
privileged, though it is always going to
be very privileged would suit us well.
And I think I don't know. I don't know
what William's going to do. I don't know
any of them, so I have no idea what
they're going to do.
>> Do you miss being part of those kinds of
occasions and commentating on them?
>> No. [laughter]
>> A moment that's fast. Well, I tell you
what, I've always stopped doing things
when I thought I've sort of done them as
well as I can. I mean, I I did question
time for 25 years and I was coming up to
80 or whatever it was. And I thought,
actually, this is only going to go
downhill from here. And one day
somebody's going to come up and say, do
you know, I think it's time you stop
doing this. So, I stopped doing that.
And royal commentaries, I mean, the last
one I did was state occasions was the
Senate half. And again, I'd done it so
many times and I've been quite ill
before the before the last one I did.
And uh and but it went very well for
some reason. I thought, right, this is
the moment to stop.
>> Go out on a high.
>> That is why I like doing podcasts and
this and that. I mean, when an election
comes up, I have to say I still think I
wonder whether I couldn't do that better
than [laughter]
terrible arrogance. But I've always I
enjoy broadcasting. say if you enjoy it
and it's in my it's in my blood. I mean
I see an election broadcast and I want
to be there saying you you
know commanding the stage.
I like it. I like question time for that
reason. So if another vehicle came
start all over again.
>> Who knows? David Dimby, thank you so
much for coming in.
>> Oh, thank you for tempting me in. I
enjoyed talking to you.
And that's where we left things. David
Dimpleb's verdict on Kier Starmmer is
harsh. So among my notes in the written
version of this episode is one where I
look at the prime minister's record,
including the fact that UK economic
growth has risen this year. You'll find
it at bloomberg.com/michell.